upstairs with your friends.
That's not available for conversation.
I would be upstairs with Susanna.
She'd be asleep.
But you can see what page I'm on.
I mean, I've read the various introductions, but I'm on page four.
You're using an oak leaf, I think, for a book plan.
Can you tell us a little bit about the passion for exploration in the Arctic?
Well,
I can't say why exactly, but I've always been interested in things northern and then Arctic and then Antarctic.
I'm interested in exploration and have always been interested in the outdoors and wilderness stuff.
I was a mountaineering instructor for a time after college.
That was my first job as a mountaineering instructor in Wyoming.
My brother still lives in Wyoming and teaches kayaking and natural history.
various other things.
But I think from an early age, I was very interested in C.S.
Lewis, and I shared C.S.
Lewis's interest in northerness.
And then later on, I became interested simultaneously, I would say, in the literature of polar exploration.
and in the literature of mountaineering, which is what I was actually doing.
So I was also very interested in reading mountaineering classics like Annapurna and so on, which I read in college.
But the notion of going as far as one could go, whether it's as high as one could go or as far north or south as one could go, has always interested me.
I'm interested in
the topography and the natural history of the Arctic more, but I'm interested in the personalities of the Antarctic explorers more.
And I think that the Antarctic explorers particularly interest me because the most interesting ones were failures.
And I think failure is usually more interesting than success.
Yeah.
So I find that Scott is more interesting to me than Amundsen.
And Shackleton, Shackleton's most heroic expedition, it's great.
His plan was to do a transit of the entire continent of Antarctica, and he never got to Antarctica.
What happened was that his ship was frozen in for the winter, and so they overwintered in the ship.
the ice that it was caught between cracked the ship and they had to leave the ship and then he, some of them ended up on sort of one little shore and then in a tiny boat, an open boat, he traveled over about a thousand miles to Elephant Island with some of his men and got, anyway, it was a very heroic tale.
Everybody thought he was a great hero, but he never actually got to Antarctica.
I mean, the entire expedition, he never even reached the place that he was supposed to cross the entirety of.
The, um,
Humor of this somehow I don't think is apparent to others.
I think it's just hilarious, but I think it's also wonderful because what he did actually was much more heroic.
He didn't lose a single man.
This was the trip that was written about in the famous boy's story Endurance by Lansing, which I read as a teenager.
And the whole notion of the heroism of failure, I think,
bound me to these guys also, because the great periods of exploration were Victorian and Edwardian.
In college, I studied Victorian history and literature.
That was my field of concentration, so I was particularly interested in British exploration.
I felt that the kinds of things that I was reading about in college
The sorts of intellectual history that I was reading about and the kind of sensibility that comes out also in Victorian novels was being enacted in real life in some very interesting ways by the explorers who were either exploring right then or just after.
Of course, Scott was post-Victorian but was bringing every Victorian
point of view, and also even his books that he's brought.
I love that, by the way.
You have stuff in here of books.
I'm very interested.
I'd love to talk to that woman who was up in space.
Remember her?
And she said she read.
I'd love to know what books.
Oh, what did she bring?
It's sort of like Desert Island reading.
There's a book by Carrie Waite.
Did you read it?
I haven't read it.
I haven't read it either.
What did he read?
Well, they didn't give him anything.
Finally, they give him something like a textbook, you know, totally the most boring book.
He devoured it.
Oh, yeah.
It just became the most important thing.
Let's talk a little bit about this.
Sure.
I did a Nexus search, and by the way, I found tons of all of your Life magazine pieces are in there, which is, you know, I was looking at some of them, and then, of course, there was some
interest in your appointment, especially in the person you succeeded.
You might talk a little bit about the American Scholar, what it represents and what you'd like to see.
Sure, let me get some ice water.
That'd be great, actually.
The Scholar is now my passion, my obsession.
Having done a couple of books, the obvious thing would be for anyone who had a book or to write more reportorial articles like the ones I did for life.
And I think people who are my age tend to get into ultra-safe grooves.
They tend to keep on doing the things that they know they do well.
Often they're in financial positions that make it impossible for them to take risks.
Their children are in age and they need to start saving that money for college.
I mean, we are also at that point financially, so it is hard to take a risk.
But I felt that as I looked around at my friends and saw many of them just very deeply grooved in their lives, I think what I had learned from doing my first book was how important it is to...
try new things, get out of the groove.
And I felt that it would be very exciting to do something of which I might fall flat on my face, that that would be by far the most exciting thing I could possibly do in my mid-forties, is to take that kind of risk.
So when the opportunity to be... I mean, I was contacted by the search committee at The Scholar.
At that point, I had no idea...
that Joseph Epstein, that was the first, when I got that call, was the first I heard that Joseph Epstein was leaving, let alone that he had been fired.
And that came as complete news to me.
But when I was contacted by the search committee, the more I thought about it, the more I felt that I might make a complete idiot of myself in front of, you know, really in public.
If you write a book and it's a failure, unless you're already famous, it simply doesn't get reviewed.
And
You say you've wasted your time, but it's not exactly... You quietly disappear.
You quietly disappear, whereas standing with a scholar would be incredibly public.
So it was a huge... Especially following Epstein, too.
Especially following Mr. Epstein.
But I felt that it was the one thing I could do that would be the biggest risk and the biggest change that I could possibly make in my life at this point.
It would also be associating myself with what I think is one of the greatest journals in the country.
I felt like I couldn't say no.
It was just so exciting, although also very scary.
Mr. Epstein, I thought, had done a really wonderful job with the scholar.
There are certainly plenty of things we disagree about, but most of the things that we disagree about were not actually things that had anything to do with the scholar,
His own column in The Scholar was completely nonpolitical and just wonderful.
He's such a great essayist.
He's a very good editor, too, and an extremely nice man who has been incredibly helpful to me.
Although I think he was very angry at Phi Beta Kappa for dismissing him, he...
is large-spirited enough to know that my being chosen for editor had nothing to do with his being dismissed and that first he was dismissed and then the search committee went through an incredibly long process that ended up with me.
He's never taken out his anger at Phi Beta Kappa on me and has been nothing... That's a very classy... He's a real gentleman, real gentleman.
Did they indicate to you
that they'd like a new direction or that maybe just a new blood was in order at this particular point?
I think that they wanted to be sure that the new editor was going to be somebody who would not bring a particular political view into the magazine.
I think that it was felt that Mr. Epstein, over the years, had become more conservative and that in his choice of articles, his choice of articles sometimes reflected that.
I didn't have that feeling as strongly as Phi Beta Kappa did, because I felt that... I mean, it's true that there were very few left-wing articles in the scholar, but there weren't very many right-wing ones either, because most of the scholar was apolitical.
I would say 90% was apolitical.
And it's true that that 10% tended to be more right than left, but I felt that they were looking only at what was such a small fraction of what was in the scholar.
And I'm not interested in making the scholar political at all,
But I think there was a strong feeling that they wished, as an editor who wouldn't bring politics into the magazine, but again, I want to say that I didn't really think that the press I did very much either.
I think that there was a feeling perhaps of wanting someone younger, although I know that many of the people they considered for the job were older than I. I think I was perhaps the youngest of the short list.
So I don't think that age or gender was particularly important to them.
I mean, I know the other people that I heard afterwards, the other people that they had considered.
And some were academics, some were journalists, some were old, some were young, some were women, some were men.
I mean, it was a very interesting and heterogeneous list.
And why they finally settled on me, who knows.
But it is the controversy...
that was swirling around the time of my appointment, fortunately has died down because it was really a controversy about my predecessor's dismissal rather than about my appointment.
That is, anyone who wasn't Mr. Epstein would have been considered a scoundrel by definition by many of his supporters, though certainly not by him.
However, the same people, the same publications that threw up their hands when he was dismissed,
haven't written anything mean since my first two issues have come out.
And in fact, there have been some quite conservative people who were great friends of Mr. Epstein's who liked the scholar very much and who feel it's absolutely possible to like the old scholar and the new scholar.
Are these all your science stories?
Well, let's see.
In this issue,
There are two pieces in this issue that were assigned by Mr. Epstein.
I decided after my experience at The New Yorker that I would eventually print everything that Mr. Epstein had accepted or wasn't able to run.
He didn't ask me.
It's nice to him, and it's also very nice to the writers, too.
Some of them may have to wait a while since we've come out only four times a year.
But there are two good pieces in this issue that Mr. Epstein had assigned.
The David Canadine piece on John Buchan and Voices of Science by David Locke.
The other ones I either assigned or came in to me.
In some cases, people will call me up.
Catherine Stimson, who used to be the head of the MacArthur Fellows and is now the dean of the graduate school at NYU, called me and said that she was thinking of writing.
I guess that she had written the first draft of an essay about...
being mugged and did I want to see it.
Hortense Kalischer wrote me a letter after she read about me in the New York Times and said she thought it sounded as if I was doing interesting things with a scholar.
Well, that turned around pretty quickly then.
That story wasn't that long ago in the Times.
Right.
That's right.
And Vermeer is someone whose work I read and liked very much, and I called him up.
He's a oncologist.
He's blind.
He wrote a lovely piece about
exploring a tide pool with senses other than sight.
Brian Doyle is someone who had written for The Scholar before, a writer that I particularly like and that I had called up and particularly encouraged to write something else.
And he came up with this absolutely wonderful piece about being a camp counselor.
So the subjects in terms of brow height really are quite varied from everything from being a camp counselor
to actually the most erudite piece in here by Adam Kirsch.
He wrote it when he was 21 years old, and that's when he came in over the transom.
He's absolutely brilliant.
So do you have an idea of what you're looking for?
Yes, I do.
And by the way, I am Philo Noe.
So this is, I have this column that I write.
And did you identify them?
Yes.
Well, she's actually identified, you can sort of read this whole...
Here's a letter here.
Do we know that she is you?
I think that it's one of those things that I will never state, but that is sort of common knowledge in the way everyone knew Joseph Edson was our studies.
Here is, I think that one maintains the fiction that she's an unknown person, but I think that in the world of Germany, it's P-H-I-L-O
N-O-E, with a diuresis, over the E. And Philonoë means a lover of things of the mind, a lover of knowledge.
I thought it was a good name because as an
As an essayist and an editor, it's not claiming that I'm actually knowledgeable, just that I love knowledge.
That's great.
How did you find that?
Well, she's a minor character.
She's the daughter of the King of Sparta and didn't do anything particularly interesting in her life.
I had a lot of people looking around for me.
It was actually a name that my brother found for me.
He was reading through various... I thought it would be nice to continue the tradition of the classical...
But she was chosen entirely for the meaning of her name.
You asked what I wanted the scholar to do.
Let me first say that the American scholar is in some way a misnomer.
The first time I met him, he endeared himself to me forever by saying this.
He said, you know, that damn name.
I've been dealing with it for 23 years, and now you have to deal with it.
And what he meant was that it made people think that this magazine was much more scholarly than it really is.
It's not a magazine by or for scholars.
As I said, only 15% of our subscribers are academics.
The title comes from an 1837 speech by Ralph Waldo Emerson.
which was actually quite famously anti-intellectual.
It was called The American Scholar, and it was exhorting his listeners to break away from the dry, dusty libraries of Europe and establish an American intellectual tradition that was much more vigorous and based on experience rather than just reading.
This is the famous quote from it that I decided to use about it.
So you have had some very subtle little changes.
Oh, and it's completely redesigned, looks totally different.
It's quite different.
It has all new departments.
If you look at the old scholar and the new scholar, it's, I think, very much in the same tradition, at least I hope, but with very substantial changes.
All the departments are new.
The redesign is new.
In any case, it is not a magazine for scholars.
It is a magazine for people who like good essays.
And if there's one word I hope people will associate with a scholar, it's essays.
The essays are on all kinds of things.
My essays, my first one was on collecting nature.
It's about how I collected butterflies and shells as a kid.
This one is about Charles Lamb.
In our first...
issue.
We had everything from Alfred Kazin writing about visiting the Met for the first time at the age of 11, which had been 71 years before he wrote the essay, to an essay on the essay by Ved Meda, and then our most unusual subject, a wonderful essay by Jonathan Rosen on the Talmud and the Internet, on the parallels in structure between the two, sort of non-linear nature of the two.
It was also about his grandmother's death and everything else in the universe.
And the point being that the Talmud and the Internet had probably never been mentioned in the same sentence before.
And this marriage, which I hope was not a shotgun marriage, was consummated in the pages of The Scholar.
One of the things that is kind of emblematic of The Scholar in this issue, I wrote my editor's letter here about...
The fact that just by coincidence, there are two pieces in this issue that are written by two Harvard graduates exactly 70 years apart.
One is a class of 27 and one is a class of 97.
And in fact, when then I looked at the other, I didn't put this in the editor's note, but when I just looked at who else I had in the issue, we had one contributor therefore in his 20s and one in his 90s.
And there were also contributors, at least one, in his or her 30s, 40s, 50s, 60s, 70s, and 80s.
And so in terms of age, it's...
It covers the waterfront.
But look at the stature of it, right?
Well, it's pretty impressive.
It's pretty, yeah.
And in the next issue, we have the lead pieces by Cynthia Ozick.
And then there's a long piece for serial rights from Peter Gay's new memoir about growing up in Nazi Berlin.
There's an excerpt from Phyllis Rose's journal.
It's amazing.
Who's willing to write for us for hardly any money?
What's the circulation?
$25,000.
How much of that would you say is university libraries?
Oh, a tiny fraction.
That's good, you know, because they're disappearing.
The journal is... I'll have the numbers on that in my new book.
But the journal is really a thing of the past now in terms of being purchased by universities.
The budget... And that's really sad.
And it really will affect... I mean, so many of your journals will...
in the very near future be published on the Internet.
Yeah, well... Certainly that's not going to be the case with this, I imagine.
No, we are developing a little website, but I'm not very interested in it yet because I am interested in holding the physical book.
As you know from my book, for me, there's something extremely important about the physical book.
And I don't mean...
the rarity of a book.
I don't think that carnal lovers like very rare books, because then they feel that they can't be carnal.
With a rare book, you have to be a platonic lover.
With a rare book, you can't dog-ear the pages, and you can't write in them, and you can't put an ugly hand to keep the page.
But with a book that's not particularly rare and not particularly valuable,
you can do whatever you want.
But I do believe that there is something about being able to curl up in bed with a book, about being able to hold it and maybe scrawl in it, and maybe, in my daughter's case, not only read the same titles, but the actual books that her father read at the same age.
It's really quite moving to see her pick up a Thornton Burgess book that...
my husband read when he was a boy, and that one of his grandparents also read as a child, and think it's not only a title, that that grandparent turned the actual page.
Did you see Berita's journal?
Did you ever?
I haven't done it since the seventh grade.
But you did it, though.
I've never done it.
It's not a journal.
I used to keep a list of titles of books when I was in the seventh and eighth grade.
But I read so many books then that it was hard to keep up.
It used to be a hundred.
No, I don't.
Part of it is that having two small children and working full-time, there just isn't time to do the things that I've... It would be fun to do so.
But sometimes I'll write little notes in the back of a book, especially if it's something that I think I might want to write about someday, or I'll turn down pages.
Sometimes I'll Xerox things.
My commonplace book has degenerated just to a folder of Xerox pages.
I have a Xerox machine at home, and things I think I might want to write about someday or that I would like to keep go in there.
There's this physician, and his name escapes me because he won a Nobel Prize, and he lives outside of Boston for a while.
his project.
He didn't win the Nobel Prize for his writing, but for his projects.
But he did write a book, Hoden Mifflin published it, did an interview with him.
Fascinating guy.
His name is escaping me right now.
But he put together a database.
Very high percentage, although I do have, I guess about a thousand books.
Maybe it's less.
That's not much.
No, no, no, no.
We have about 4,000 or 4,500.
I was very surprised.
It's about 4,500.
No, but just to complete this, it's about 1,000 books, maybe a little less, came from my father.
I probably have read a smaller fraction of those because they entered my life relatively recently.
The other books entered one by one.
No, I think it's about 4,500.
We may be creeping up a little over 5,000 now.
But you live in the city, right?
Yeah, we live in a loft, an old box factory with floor-to-ceiling bookcases that are totally overflowing.
We don't follow the policy that a friend of mine follows that his wife finally, it's sort of like the whole notion of the canon, she finally said when you get a new book you have to get rid of an old one.
And we're not quite at that point, but if we get
Two new books will get rid of one.
One of the big jokes in my house is reading time.
When we're getting rid of books, and I've got thousands of books.
Obviously you get review books, and I buy books, and they are really all over the place.
How many do you have?
More than 10,000?
Oh, more than 10,000.
There must be at least 2,500 children's books, but we love children's books.
I review children's books, and I've got a couple of miscreepers.
I do eight children's books a month in one.
I love it.
I would even like to write a couple of children's books.
Why not?
Put your money where your mouth is.
There's a woman in Boston, a physician, who's also a children's book writer and is also a pediatric doctor.
Did you see that story in the New York Times where they're actually prescribing books as part of... No.
Oh, interesting.
When did that run?
I'll have to get it for you.
I have the article.
That brings together two of my main interests, medicine and books.
For inner-city kids, too.
So they come in and instead of giving them a lollipop, they'll give them a book.
That's great.
I've got to write about this.
This looks pretty good.
What was I talking about?
About the number of books that you have.
You have a lot of books.
Anyway, you have a lot.
There's no way I've read every book or ever will.
Weeding, yeah.
Weeding.
So every once in a while, I've got to get rid of these books.
I'm a past president of the Friends of the Garden Library, so I'll give them 200 books for their sale.
Review books, I can give them, and they can sell them, and they can get rid of the trash, too.
But the weeding process, I have actually taken a look and have gone back, become panic-stricken.
and to go back and brought them back.
Oh, there's that wonderful story in your book about the Frenchman who, oh, that one was just so poignant.
I always wanted to put that in one of my essays.
The journalist found that story.
Oh, it's a wonderful story.
It's the most poignant book story I have ever heard.
I found that in an article on the wholesale in one of the old New York papers.
It's supposed to reverse itself.
I thought you'd
No, no, no.
This is wonderful.
This goes an hour.
Boy, that's a great tape.
It only takes one AAA, and it goes automatically in the other direction, so you get two hours out of it.
Oh, that's great.
And the quality of the tape is pretty good?
It's the best.
Oh, that's great.
But you don't listen to it out of this.
You put it in.
Right, right.
But the fidelity of the... You've got it transcribed with a foot pedal and that.
Yeah.
God, I hate transcription.
I despise it.
For the new book, easily, I'm 60 tapes behind.
And I'll never catch up.
I just hate it.
I shouldn't say so much.
I keep thinking, oh, you're going to have to transcribe it.
I have my sympathy.
This stuff here, you go fast.
And we've got tons of stuff, by the way.
I'm just so thoroughly... See if there's anything else that you have.
My family still isn't back, so we can...
I love the story on your father.
I mean, not when he lost his sight, of course, but that Milton sonnet.
And Errath Ostenes, who could no longer read because they didn't have classes, the first or second librarian, and he starved himself to death.
I wondered where we were going with that.
And the example of Milton, of course, is beautiful.
But that you read it to him on the phone is very touching.
Well, I knew that night in the hospital when we, it was the first thing that he'd gotten interested in, reconstructing that sauna.
And his curiosity, I know he knew he wasn't going to die until at least he had heard me read the saunas on the phone.
That sense of intellectual curiosity still being alive made me feel maybe this will be okay.
And indeed, he has reconstructed his life in the most amazing way.
And can you briefly tell me how he's doing now and what he's doing now?
He's doing fine.
He's 94.
I have an 87-year-old father.
My father at 94 physically is really doing quite incredibly except for his sight.
That is, he doesn't even use a cane to walk.
I mean, not only for being blind, but just for sort of... Getting around.
Yeah.
I mean, not that he goes for long hikes, but he can...
easily get into a restaurant.
He lives a very normal life with my mother.
They go out to dinner several times a week.
He still works for the Book of the Month Club.
He's worked for them for about 60 years, in addition to doing many other things.
They record manuscripts for him.
They're on tape.
Oh, thank you.
By the way, let me just explain, and I'll get back to my father.
This is the same
uh and but ex libris is now part of the book plate i said i wanted it to be on the book plate because of course ex libris and it goes on the book plate so i said it should be on a book plate and then confessions of a common reader sort of across in a stripe and then this is just plain green and not quite so poisonous as this shade and then this these little things with this sort of weird giraffe reticulation which i don't particularly like but these are from an old sears catalog so
It's like the Sears catalog that I referred to in my catalog.
Those are now the end papers.
All right, now.
That's great.
And if you would kindly just indicate on the cape or something like that.
Okay.
And the date.
You have John Dunning, an ad for John Dunning's book of the Pack of the American Scholar there.
What's the book?
The book on radio, the history of radio.
It's an ad, I noticed.
I was just supposed to see him, and I just got back from Colorado two nights ago.
He wrote Book to Die and Bookman's Wake.
Uh-huh.
Have you ever read any of those?
No, I haven't.
Oh, they're wonderful.
Oh, I should read them.
How could I have missed them?
Oh, they're mysteries.
I see.
Yeah, but they're terrific.
Uh-huh.
He's a terrific writer.
He just happens also to have been a former Aquarium bookseller.
But I just noticed.
I was supposed to see him.
Couldn't put it together.
In fact, I wanted to do a Biblio piece on them.
By the way, you mentioned the Strand earlier.
My next feature is on the Strand.
It's a profile on the Strand.
And then you follow after that.
I go there all the time.
I love that place.
It's dangerous.
The bookstore is so cheap that you keep saying it's a bargain, but you're just going to spend it that much.
I'm so happy he's got his daughter in there now.
They're going to modernize it.
They're going to put a new floor in.
But they're bringing in this wonderful New York architect who
who specializes in old buildings.
The Parker pen was given to me.
You told the story.
Yes.
But it's the Parker pen.
I don't think it's actually in here because I think that the
It was in my last Civilization column that wasn't included in here.
A reader of my column sent me a pen.
It's an old Parker pen that is of the same vintage.
I think you mentioned that.
There's a replacement.
Well, I bought a replacement.
It didn't work.
It would make me sick to lose my pen.
It was.
It was so terrible.
Now I have this other one that this really nice reader sent me that I wrote about in my last column.
My last column was a letter to my readers, and so we decided not to include it in here.
Do you need any more pictures or reading?
Yeah, I do.